README.md, before:

# Wind Forecaster

## Overview
Wind Forecaster is a web application designed to fetch and display weather forecast data, with a primary focus on wind conditions for kiteboarders, wind surfers, and wing foilers. It uses a [Flask-based](https://github.com/pallets/flask) Python backend that handles API data retrieval from the [Open-Meteo API](https://open-meteo.com/), and uses [MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/) for CRUD operations. On the frontend, it's an [NGINX-based](https://www.nginx.com/) React web app with [Material UI](https://mui.com/material-ui/) for the client side components and interactions. It is containerized and orchestrated using Docker's [`docker compose`](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) for ease of development and testing.

## Getting Started
The project utilizes Docker Compose to orchestrate multiple containers within Docker. This means the frontend, backend and database run in separate containers, but are networked together within Docker, and are also accessible via `localhost`.

### Prerequisites
- [Install Git](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git)
- [Install Docker](https://docs.docker.com/desktop/install/mac-install/) and start it
- Open a Terminal and run `git clone https://github.com/SRF-Audio/Wind-Forecaster.git` in the folder of your choosing
- (Optional, but highly recommended) [Install Mongo Compass](https://www.mongodb.com/products/tools/compass)

### Run with Docker Compose:

Navigate to the project repo's root folder in Terminal and run:

- `docker compose up --build` 
(**NOTE**: First time builds may take 2-3 minutes depending on your internet speed. Follow on builds will have cached layers, and should be faster)

Once the build process finishes, the React frontend will be accessible in a browser at http://localhost:3000.

- 11 Sept '23: If a card shows up on the page with Lat/Long coordinates, then the app is fully working. If the front end can't reach the backend, the app will display that corresponding message.
- If you'd like to peek under the hood more, then see below.

The Flask backend API can be hit at http://localhost:5000/weather and you should get a JSON response from the DB.

You can also look at the database directly by opening Mongo Compass, and using the connection string: `mongodb://admin:pass@localhost:27017/windForecaster?authSource=admin`
Everything is written to `weather_database` in the `Forecasts` collection.

Commit message:

Steps to show dynamic front end.

README.md, after:

# Wind Forecaster

## Overview
Wind Forecaster is a web application designed to fetch and display weather forecast data, with a primary focus on wind conditions for kiteboarders, wind surfers, and wing foilers. It uses a [Flask-based](https://github.com/pallets/flask) Python backend that handles API data retrieval from the [Open-Meteo API](https://open-meteo.com/), and uses [MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/) for CRUD operations. On the frontend, it's an [NGINX-based](https://www.nginx.com/) React web app with [Material UI](https://mui.com/material-ui/) for the client side components and interactions. It is containerized and orchestrated using Docker's [`docker compose`](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) for ease of development and testing.

## Getting Started
The project utilizes Docker Compose to orchestrate multiple containers within Docker. This means the frontend, backend and database run in separate containers, but are networked together within Docker, and are also accessible via `localhost`.

### Prerequisites
- [Install Git](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git)
- [Install Docker](https://docs.docker.com/desktop/install/mac-install/) and start it
- Open a Terminal and run `git clone https://github.com/SRF-Audio/Wind-Forecaster.git` in the folder of your choosing
- (Optional, but highly recommended) [Install Mongo Compass](https://www.mongodb.com/products/tools/compass)

### Run with Docker Compose

Navigate to the project repo's root folder in Terminal and run:

- `docker compose up --build` 
(**NOTE**: First time builds may take 2-3 minutes depending on your internet speed. Follow on builds will have cached layers, and should be faster)

#### Front end

Once the build process finishes, the React frontend will be accessible in a browser at http://localhost:3000.

- 11 Sept '23: If a card shows up on the page with Lat/Long coordinates, then the app is fully working. If the front end can't reach the backend, the app will display that corresponding message.
- If you'd like to peek under the hood more, then see below.

#### Backend

The Flask backend API can be hit at http://localhost:5000/weather and you should get a JSON response from the DB.

#### Database

You can also look at the database directly by opening Mongo Compass, and using the connection string: `mongodb://admin:pass@localhost:27017/windForecaster?authSource=admin`
Everything is written to `weather_database` in the `Forecasts` collection.


## Simulating Backend Downtime with Docker

This section will guide you on how to simulate a scenario where the backend service goes down and observe how the frontend dynamically adjusts its message based on the backend status.

This assumes that you have followed the steps in [Run with Docker Compose](#run-with-docker-compose) and are viewing the app at http://localhost:3000

- Step 1: Simulating Backend Downtime
To simulate the backend service going down, you can stop the backend container using Docker:

`docker ps | grep 'backend' | awk '{print $1}' | xargs docker kill`


After executing this command, if you refresh the frontend, it should now display the message indicating that there's no backend connection.

Step 2: Bringing the Backend Back Up
To bring the backend service back up, start the container again using:

`docker compose up`

Now, refresh the page, and it should show the lat/long card.
